Blog post - Best langsmith alternatives (#18149)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/blog/best-langsmith-alternatives.mdx

date: 2026-07-07
author:
    - natalia-amorim
rootpage: /blog
featuredImage: >-
    https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/posthog.com/contents/images/blog/hog_ql.png
featuredImageType: full
category: General
tags:
    - Comparisons
seo:
  metaTitle: 'The best LangSmith alternatives & competitors, compared'
  metaDescription: 'Looking for a LangSmith alternative? Compare the best LLM observability tools, including PostHog, Langfuse, Helicone, and more.'

---

LangSmith is LangChain's platform for monitoring, debugging, and evaluating LLM applications. It's good at what it does, especially if you're deep in the LangChain ecosystem. 

But maybe you're not. Or maybe you've seen the pricing page. Or you want [something open source](/blog/best-open-source-llm-observability-tools), or something that tells you whether your AI features actually work for users, not just whether they ran.

Whatever brought you here, this guide compares the best LangSmith alternatives, including where each one beats LangSmith and where it doesn't.

## 1. PostHog

- **Founded:** 2020
- **Similar to:** Langfuse, Braintrust
- **Typical users:** Engineers and product teams building AI-powered products

> - **Typical customers:** Mid-size B2Bs and startups

Reviewer: If everyone else names their customers, we should too

![PostHog AI Observability](https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/w_1600,c_limit,q_auto,f_auto/Clean_Shot_2026_06_22_at_13_19_01_2x_acc4617c50.png)

### What is PostHog?

> **[PostHog](/)** (that's us 👋) is the leading platform for self-driving products. You can use our desktop ([Code](/code)), [web](/ai), [Slack](/slack), and [MCP](/mcp) products to leverage tools like [product analytics](/product-analytics), [session replay](/session-replay), [feature flags](/feature-flags), [experiments](/experiments), [error tracking](/error-tracking), [AI observability](/ai-observability), [logs](/logs), and more.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**[PostHog](/)** (that's us 👋) is the leading platform for self-driving products. You can use our desktop ([Code](/code)), [web](/ai), [Slack](/slack), and [MCP](/mcp) products to leverage tools like [AI observability](/ai-observability), [product analytics](/product-analytics), [session replay](/session-replay), [feature flags](/feature-flags), [experiments](/experiments), [error tracking](/error-tracking), [logs](/logs), and more.
```

### Key features

- [**Generations**](docs/ai-observability/generations): Monitor model performance, token usage, costs, latency, and errors across your AI features from a single view.

- [**Traces**](docs/ai-observability/traces): Follow AI workflows from start to finish to understand how requests move through prompts, tools, and model calls.

- [**AI evals**](docs/ai-evals/evaluations): Automatically score model outputs using LLM-as-a-judge or code-based checks to track quality and identify regressions over time.

- [**Prompt management**](docs/prompt-management) *(beta):* Create, version, and update prompts without redeploying code. Compare versions and understand how prompt changes affect outputs.

- [**Session replay:**](docs/session-replay) Watch [real user sessions alongside LLM traces](/docs/ai-observability/link-session-replay) to understand exactly what happened in context, including console logs and network activity.

- [**Feature flags and experiments:**](/docs/feature-flags) Safely roll out AI features with multivariate flags and [run A/B tests on prompts](/docs/prompt-management/prompt-experiments), models, or AI features to measure real product impact.

> - [**Error tracking:**](docs/error-tracking) Capture and triage errors with full [stack traces correlated with user sessions and LLM events](/docs/ai-observability/link-error-tracking) via error tracking.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [**Generations**](/docs/ai-observability/generations): Monitor model performance, token usage, costs, latency, and errors across your AI features from a single view.

- [**Traces**](/docs/ai-observability/traces): Follow AI workflows from start to finish to understand how requests move through prompts, tools, and model calls.

- [**AI evals**](/docs/ai-evals/evaluations): Automatically score model outputs using LLM-as-a-judge or code-based checks to track quality and identify regressions over time.

- [**Prompt management**](/docs/prompt-management) *(beta):* Create, version, and update prompts without redeploying code. Compare versions and understand how prompt changes affect outputs.

- [**Session replay:**](/docs/session-replay) Watch [real user sessions alongside LLM traces](/docs/ai-observability/link-session-replay) to understand exactly what happened in context, including console logs and network activity.

- [**Feature flags and experiments:**](/docs/feature-flags) Safely roll out AI features with multivariate flags and [run A/B tests on prompts](/docs/prompt-management/prompt-experiments), models, or AI features to measure real product impact.

- [**Error tracking:**](/docs/error-tracking) Capture and triage errors with full [stack traces correlated with user sessions and LLM events](/docs/ai-observability/link-error-tracking) via error tracking.
```

</details>

### Why do companies use PostHog?

According to [reviews on G2](https://www.g2.com/products/posthog/reviews), companies use PostHog because:

- **It replaces multiple tools:** PostHog covers analytics, session replay, feature flags, A/B testing, LLM observability, and more in one platform, removing the need to stitch separate tools together.

- **Pricing is transparent and scalable:** The [free tier](/pricing) gives you 100K AI observability events, 1M product analytics events, 5K session recordings, and 1M feature flag requests each month, all without needing a credit card. Startups can also apply for an extra [$50k in credits](/startups).

- **It connects AI behavior to real product outcomes:** Teams use PostHog to understand not just what the model did, but whether it actually worked for the user.

> #### Bottom line
>
> PostHog is the strongest LangSmith alternative for teams building user-facing AI products who want AI observability, analytics, experimentation, and more in one place.

<WizardCTA />

## 2. Langfuse

- **Founded:** 2023
- **Most similar to:** LangSmith
- **Typical users:** Engineers and AI teams building and debugging LLM applications

> - **Typical customers:** Startups and mid-size companies shipping LLM features to production

Reviewer: Should name customers here too to be similar to others.

- Langfuse's Core plan starts at $29/month. LangSmith's Plus plan costs $39 per seat per month with trace overage on top.
- Langfuse's prompt management includes one-click rollbacks and integrated monitoring per prompt version. LangSmith's prompt versioning is more basic and doesn't surface per-version performance metrics in the same way.

</details>

<details>
<summary>Main similarities between Langfuse and LangSmith</summary>

- Both offer LLM tracing, prompt management, and evaluation workflows.
- Both support LangChain integration out of the box.
- Both provide dashboards for monitoring cost, latency, and model performance.
- Both offer a free tier with no credit card required.

</details>

### Why do companies use Langfuse?

According to Langfuse customer stories, companies use Langfuse because:

- **It improves visibility into LLM applications:** Merck uses Langfuse to track prompts, responses, costs, and latency in real time, helping turn "black-box models into auditable, optimizable assets."

- **It helps teams iterate faster:** Cresta says Langfuse makes it easier to test, learn, and improve AI agents, speeding up iteration on LLM behavior.

> - **It can reduce operational costs:** SumUp reports saving 30% of external BPO costs by deflecting 50% of support conversations to AI.

Reviewer: can we expand the BPO acronym?

        'ai_observability.features.sentiment_classification',
        'ai_observability.features.trace_summarization',
        'ai_observability.features.privacy_mode',
        'ai_observability.features.agent_tracing',
        'ai_observability.features.prompt_management',
        'ai_observability.features.prompt_evaluations',
        'ai_observability.features.evaluation_datasets',
        'ai_observability.features.human_annotation',
        'session_replay',
        'product_analytics',
        'platform.deployment.open_source',
        'platform.deployment.eu_hosting',
    ]}
/>
</p>

<details>
<summary>Main differences between Braintrust and LangSmith</summary>

- Braintrust's CI/CD integration works with any agent stack via a native GitHub Action that blocks merges based on eval scores. LangSmith's CI/CD quality gates are available but tied specifically to LangGraph and LangSmith Deployment infrastructure.
- Braintrust has a more complete eval lifecycle – dataset curation, CI/CD-gated releases, and AI-assisted scorer generation via Loop. LangSmith's eval workflows are strong but do not include the same end-to-end automation from production trace to CI gate.

> - Braintrust's free tier includes 1M trace spans. LangSmith's Developer plan includes 5K base traces per month on a recurring basis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Braintrust's free tier includes 1 GB processed data. LangSmith's Developer plan includes 5K base traces per month.
```

</details>

<details>
<summary>Main similarities between Braintrust and LangSmith</summary>

- Both offer LLM tracing, prompt management, and evaluation workflows.
- Both support LLM-as-a-judge and human review scoring.
- Both provide dataset management for building and versioning eval datasets.
- Neither is open source, and both require an Enterprise plan for self-hosting.
- Both offer EU data residency at no extra cost.

</details>

### Why do companies use Braintrust?

> Based on usage across teams at Notion, Zapier, Stripe, Vercel, and Cloudflare, teams choose Braintrust because:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Based on usage across Notion, Zapier, Stripe, Vercel, and Cloudflare, teams choose Braintrust because:
```

- **End-to-end eval workflow:** Tracing, dataset curation, prompt management, and CI/CD-gated releases in a single platform. The one-click trace-to-dataset workflow is consistently cited as a standout feature.

- **Fast trace search:** Brainstore, Braintrust's AI-optimized database, handles queries faster than traditional databases, making it practical for millions of production traces.

- **Robust eval infrastructure:** Teams running LLM-as-a-judge, human annotation, and automated CI/CD regression checks find Braintrust uniquely capable of handling high-volume workflows.

> #### Bottom line
>
> Braintrust is a strong alternative to LangSmith for teams that focus on evaluation workflows. The main drawback is that it isn't open source or free to self-host.

## 4. Arize Phoenix

- **Founded:** 2020
- **Most similar to:** LangSmith, Langfuse
- **Typical users:** AI engineers and data scientists building and monitoring LLM applications

> - **Typical customers:** Enterprise engineering teams – customers include DoorDash, Instacart, Uber, Roblox, Microsoft, and Booking.com

Reviewer: I see Reddit, Pepsi, Spotify, Tripadvisor, but not these two
```suggestion
- **Typical customers:** Enterprise engineering teams – customers include DoorDash, Instacart, Uber, and Booking.com
```

- **It keeps data under your control:** Phoenix runs entirely locally or in a container with no data leaving your infrastructure, making it a strong fit for teams in regulated industries or with strict data privacy requirements.

- **It provides a clear upgrade path for growing teams:** Phoenix users can move seamlessly to Arize AX when they need enterprise features like custom dashboards, dedicated support, or HIPAA compliance – without changing their instrumentation code.

> #### Bottom line
>
> Arize Phoenix is a source-available observability and evaluation platform with some of the strongest OpenTelemetry support in the LLM tooling ecosystem. Its technical, engineering-focused experience is the main tradeoff compared with more collaborative platforms.

## 5. Weights & Biases Weave

- **Founded:** 2018
- **Most similar to:** LangSmith, Arize Phoenix
- **Typical users:** ML engineers and AI developers building and iterating on LLM applications

> - **Typical customers:** Research teams and companies running both ML and LLM workloads – customers include OpenAI, Meta, NVIDIA, Cohere, Toyota, Salesforce, and Microsoft

Reviewer: We should try to focus on the Weave product which has fewer customers

lol https://wandb.ai/site/customers-new/salesforce/

<img width="1858" height="1134" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/2847eb5d-35ac-47c3-8fa1-a878a6e1048c" />

<img width="1292" height="534" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/92a40415-795b-43cf-a57a-c8858168430a" />

```suggestion
- **Typical customers:** Research teams and companies running both ML and LLM workloads – customers include Canva, Toyota, Salesforce, and Shell
```

</details>

<details>
<summary>Main similarities between W&B Weave and LangSmith</summary>

- Both offer LLM tracing, prompt management, and evaluation workflows.
- Both support LLM-as-a-judge scoring and dataset management.
- Both provide a free tier to get started without a credit card.
- Both offer EU hosting and SOC 2 compliance for enterprise teams.

</details>

### Why do companies use W&B Weave?

According to discussions on Reddit and the MLOps community, teams use Weave because:

- **It makes tracing and evaluations easy to adopt:** Developers say Weave can be added with only a few lines of code, making it straightforward to start monitoring LLM applications and running evaluations.

- **It works well for experimentation workflows:** Practitioners highlight Weave's combination of tracing, datasets, and evaluation tooling as useful for managing and comparing LLM experiments.

- **It's particularly appealing for Python-based AI teams:** Some users note that Weave's tracing and evaluation experience feels strongest in Python-heavy environments, especially for agent and experimentation workflows.

> #### Bottom line
>

> > W&B Weave is a good choice if your team already uses Weights & Biases for model development and experiment tracking. If you only need LLM observability, you might find more focused options in this guide.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> W&B Weave is a good choice if your team already uses Weights & Biases for model development and experiment tracking. If you only need LLM observability, you might find a more focused option better.
```

        'ai_observability.features.cost_tracking',
        'ai_observability.features.latency_tracking',
        'ai_observability.features.error_tracking',
        'ai_observability.features.sentiment_classification',
        'ai_observability.features.trace_summarization',
        'ai_observability.features.privacy_mode',
        'ai_observability.features.agent_tracing',
        'ai_observability.features.prompt_management',
        'ai_observability.features.prompt_evaluations',
        'ai_observability.features.evaluation_datasets',
        'ai_observability.features.human_annotation',
        'session_replay',
        'product_analytics',
        'platform.deployment.open_source',
        'platform.deployment.eu_hosting',
    ]}
/>
</p>

<details>
<summary>Main differences between Lunary and LangSmith</summary>

- Lunary is optimized for chatbot and RAG applications with built-in conversation threading and multi-turn session tracking. LangSmith works across frameworks but is optimized for LangChain chain and agent debugging.
- Lunary's topic classification automatically categorizes and flags LLM responses against custom criteria. LangSmith has no equivalent 

> automated response categorization feature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Lunary's topic classification automatically categorizes and flags LLM responses against custom criteria. LangSmith has no equivalent automated response categorization feature.
```

If you want [open-source](/blog/best-open-source-llm-observability-tools), [lower-cost](/blog/cheapest-ai-observability-tools), or product analytics-connected observability, alternatives like **Langfuse**, **PostHog**, or **Arize Phoenix** may be a better fit.

</details>

<details>
<summary>How does LangSmith pricing compare to PostHog at scale?</summary>

The two bill differently: LangSmith charges per trace (one per user request, regardless of internal steps) plus $39 per seat on its Plus plan. PostHog charges per event – roughly 6 events per request for a typical multi-step app (each LLM call, span, and embedding is one event) – with no seat fees.

Here's what monthly volumes cost, assuming a 5-person team (LangSmith Plus at $195/month in seats, 10K traces included, $2.50 per 1K base trace overage) versus PostHog ($6 per 100K events after 100K free):

| Requests/month | LangSmith (5 seats, base retention) | PostHog (~6 events/request) |
| --- | --- | --- |
| 100K | ~$420 | ~$30 |
| 500K | ~$1,420 | ~$174 |
| 1M | ~$2,670 | ~$354 |

> | 5M | ~$12,670 | ~$1,794 |

Reviewer: This table is great, but broken for me. You might need to use HTML components to get it working.

<img width="1482" height="742" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/cd810877-f56d-4d37-ae62-e618c692461d" />

</details>

<details>
<summary>Is there a free or open-source LangSmith alternative?</summary>

Yes. **Langfuse** is MIT-licensed and fully open source. **Arize Phoenix** is source-available under Elastic License 2.0 and free to self-host for internal use. **Lunary** is Apache 2.0 licensed with a free Community Edition for self-hosting. PostHog is also open source under MIT and includes a generous free cloud tier for LLM observability. 

For a deeper look at the open-source options specifically, see our guide to the [best open-source LLM observability tools](/blog/best-open-source-llm-observability-tools).

</details>

<details>
<summary>Can PostHog replace LangSmith?</summary>

Yes – if your primary goal is understanding how AI features perform in production rather than running sophisticated evaluation workflows.

**PostHog** covers LLM tracing, cost monitoring, and prompt tracking, while also connecting that data to product analytics, session replay, feature flags, and experiments, error tracking, and more in one platform.

> LangSmith remains stronger for advanced eval pipelines and LangGraph-native debugging. If evals are your primary requirement, Langfuse or Braintrust are stronger fits. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
LangSmith remains stronger for advanced eval pipelines and LangGraph-native debugging. Although [PostHog has evals](/docs/ai-evals), if they are your primary requirement, Langfuse or Braintrust are stronger fits. 
```
